.TH HAFOD 1 "March 2026" "hafod 1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hafod \- Scheme shell (scsh on Chez Scheme)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hafod
.br
.B hafod \-\-
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B hafod
.RB [ \-l
.IR file ]...
.B \-s
.I script
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B hafod
.RB [ \-l
.IR file ]...
.I script
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B hafod
.RB [ \-l
.IR file ]...
.B \-c
.I expression
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B hafod
.RB [ \-l
.IR file ]...
.B \-e
.I procedure
.B \-s
.I script
.RI [ args... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hafod
is a port of
.BR scsh ,
the Scheme Shell, to Chez Scheme (R6RS).
It provides a complete POSIX programming environment within Scheme,
including process notation for running Unix commands, pipelines,
and redirections, along with comprehensive bindings for file operations,
signals, regular expressions, field processing, and more.
.PP
When invoked without arguments or with
.BR \-\- ,
.B hafod
starts an interactive REPL with the
.B (hafod)
library pre-imported, making all scsh functionality immediately available.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-s " FILE"
Load and run
.I FILE
as a hafod/scsh script.
If the file starts with
.B #!
then the header (up to and including the
.B !#
line) is stripped before evaluation.
Remaining arguments are available via
.BR command\-line\-arguments .
This is a terminating switch.
.TP
.BI \-c " EXPR"
Evaluate the Scheme expression
.I EXPR
and exit.
Remaining arguments are available via
.BR command\-line\-arguments .
Cannot be combined with
.BR \-e .
This is a terminating switch.
.TP
.BI \-e " PROC"
After loading a script (via
.B \-s
or a bare filename), call
.BI ( PROC " args" )
where
.I args
is the list of remaining command-line arguments.
This is a non-terminating switch that must precede a terminator.
.TP
.BI \-l " FILE"
Load
.I FILE
before executing the main action.
This switch is repeatable; files are loaded in the order given.
Preload files are loaded after command-line parsing but before
the script, expression, or REPL starts.
This is a non-terminating switch.
.TP
.B \-\-
Start an interactive REPL.
Remaining arguments are available via
.BR command\-line\-arguments .
The
.B (hafod)
library is pre-imported into the interaction environment.
This is a terminating switch.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version string and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-config
Skip loading the user configuration file on startup.
See
.B CONFIGURATION
below.
.TP
.B \-\-norc
Alias for
.BR \-\-no\-config .
.SH REPL MODE
When
.B hafod
is invoked with no arguments, or with the
.B \-\-
switch, it starts an interactive REPL (read-eval-print loop).
The
.B (hafod)
library is automatically imported into the interaction environment,
so all scsh procedures (such as
.BR pid ,
.BR run/string ,
.BR fork ,
.BR glob ,
etc.) are available without an explicit
.B import
statement.
.PP
The REPL provides a rich line editor with syntax highlighting,
parenthesis matching, and multi-line editing.
Expressions are submitted when parentheses are balanced; pressing
Return on an incomplete expression inserts a newline instead.
Pasted text is inserted literally via bracketed paste support.
.PP
Results are pretty-printed at the current terminal width with syntax
colouring (numbers, strings, booleans, and symbols each have distinct
colours).
Errors are displayed in red.
.PP
Shell mode is also available in the REPL; see
.B SHELL MODE
below.
.PP
Any files specified with
.B \-l
are loaded before the REPL starts.
.SH SHELL MODE
In the interactive REPL,
.B hafod
can execute bare commands without wrapping them in
.BR run .
If the first token on a line matches an executable on
.B PATH
or a built-in command, the input is treated as a shell command.
.PP
Shell mode is only active in the interactive REPL; it is not
available in scripts loaded with
.B \-s
or expressions evaluated with
.BR \-c .
.SS Classification Rules
Input is classified as Scheme or shell using the following rules:
.PP
Input starting with
.BR ( ,
.BR ' ,
.BR \` ,
.BR # ,
.BR , ,
or
.B [
is always treated as Scheme.
.PP
If the first token matches a Scheme keyword (such as
.BR define ,
.BR lambda ,
.BR if ,
.BR let ,
etc.), it is treated as Scheme regardless of whether an executable
with the same name exists on PATH.
.PP
If the first token matches a PATH executable or a built-in command,
and is not a Scheme keyword, the input is treated as a shell command.
.PP
Ambiguous input (not matching any of the above) defaults to Scheme
for safety.
.SS Pipes
Commands can be piped together:
.PP
.nf
.RS
> ls \-la | grep "\\.ss$"
> cat file.txt | sort | uniq
.RE
.fi
.SS Redirections
Output can be redirected to a file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
> ls > filelist.txt
> echo "appended" >> log.txt
.RE
.fi
.PP
Input can be redirected from a file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
> sort < unsorted.txt
.RE
.fi
.SS Glob Expansion
Glob patterns are expanded before execution:
.PP
.nf
.RS
> ls *.ss
> wc \-l src/*.ss
.RE
.fi
.SS Environment Variable Interpolation
Environment variables are interpolated in arguments:
.PP
.nf
.RS
> echo $HOME
> echo ${PATH}
.RE
.fi
.SS Builtins
The following built-in commands are available in shell mode:
.TP
.BI cd " [dir]"
Change the current directory.
With no argument, changes to the home directory.
.B cd \-
returns to the previous directory.
Updates
.B PWD
and
.B OLDPWD
environment variables.
.TP
.BI pushd " dir"
Push
.I dir
onto the directory stack and change to it.
.TP
.B popd
Pop the top directory from the stack and change to it.
.TP
.BI export " VAR" = value
Set the environment variable
.I VAR
to
.IR value .
.SH CONFIGURATION
On startup in interactive mode,
.B hafod
loads
.I ~/.config/hafod/init.ss
if it exists.
The config directory follows the XDG Base Directory specification:
if
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set, the config file is
.IB $XDG_CONFIG_HOME /hafod/init.ss .
.PP
Config files are plain Scheme, evaluated via
.B load
in the interaction environment.
Any definitions or side effects take effect before the first REPL
prompt is displayed.
.PP
If an error occurs while loading the config file,
.B hafod
displays the filename and error message, then continues to the REPL
normally.
Config errors are never fatal.
.PP
To skip config loading entirely, pass
.B \-\-no\-config
(or its alias
.BR \-\-norc )
on the command line.
.SS Config API
.TP
.BI (set\-prompt! " string" )
Set the REPL prompt to
.IR string .
.TP
.BI (bind\-key! " key-desc command" )
Rebind a key in the line editor.
.I key-desc
is an Emacs-style key description such as
.BR \(dqC\-a\(dq ,
.BR \(dqM\-f\(dq ,
.BR \(dqC\-x C\-e\(dq ,
or
.BR \(dq<return>\(dq .
.I command
is a command procedure (e.g.\&
.BR cmd\-beginning\-of\-line ).
.SS Modular Config
Config files can load other files:
.PP
.nf
.RS
;; ~/.config/hafod/init.ss
(set\-prompt! "hafod> ")
(load "~/.config/hafod/keybindings.ss")
.RE
.fi
.SS Example Config
.PP
.nf
.RS
;; ~/.config/hafod/init.ss
(set\-prompt! "$ ")
(bind\-key! "C\-x C\-e" cmd\-open\-below)
(enable\-paredit!)
.RE
.fi
.SH KEYBINDINGS
The REPL line editor uses Emacs-style keybindings.
.SS Movement
.TP
.B C\-a
Move to the beginning of the line.
.TP
.B C\-e
Move to the end of the line.
.TP
.B C\-f
Move forward one character.
.TP
.B C\-b
Move backward one character.
.TP
.B M\-f
Move forward one word.
.TP
.B M\-b
Move backward one word.
.SS Editing
.TP
.B C\-d
Delete the character under the cursor.
.TP
.B C\-k
Kill from the cursor to the end of the line.
.TP
.B C\-y
Yank (paste) the last killed text.
.TP
.B M\-y
Cycle through the kill ring (after
.BR C\-y ).
.TP
.B C\-w
Kill the word before the cursor.
.TP
.B C\-t
Transpose the two characters before the cursor.
.TP
.B M\-d
Kill the word after the cursor.
.SS History
.TP
.B C\-p \fRor\fB Up
Previous history entry.
.TP
.B C\-n \fRor\fB Down
Next history entry.
.TP
.B C\-r
Reverse incremental search.
Type a substring to search backwards through history.
Press
.B C\-r
again to find older matches.
Press
.B Enter
to accept the current match, or
.B C\-g
to cancel.
.TP
.I prefix\fB Up
Type a prefix, then press
.B Up
to filter history to entries starting with that prefix.
.SS Completion
.TP
.B Tab
Complete the symbol at the cursor from the current environment.
If the cursor is inside a string literal, complete filenames instead.
When multiple completions exist, a menu is displayed.
In shell mode, the first token completes against PATH executables
and filenames.
.SS Paredit
Paredit provides structured editing for S-expressions.
Toggle it with:
.TP
.B (toggle\-paredit!)
Toggle paredit mode on or off.
.TP
.B (enable\-paredit!)
Enable paredit mode.
.TP
.B (disable\-paredit!)
Disable paredit mode.
.TP
.B (paredit\-enabled?)
Return whether paredit mode is currently enabled.
.PP
When paredit is enabled, delimiters are auto-paired and the
following structural editing keybindings are available:
.TP
.B C\-M\-f
Move forward one S-expression.
.TP
.B C\-M\-b
Move backward one S-expression.
.TP
.B C\-M\-u
Move up one S-expression (out of the current list).
.TP
.B C\-M\-d
Move down one S-expression (into the next list).
.PP
Additional paredit commands include slurp, barf, splice, wrap,
and raise.
.SH META-ARGUMENT PROCESSING
.B hafod
supports scsh-style meta-argument processing for shebang scripts.
When a script is invoked via the operating system's exec mechanism,
the kernel passes the interpreter path and a single argument.
To support multiple switches,
.B hafod
uses a two-line header protocol:
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/path/to/hafod \\\\
-e main -s
!#
(define (main args) ...)
.RE
.fi
.PP
Line 1 ends with a backslash (the meta-argument marker).
.B hafod
reads line 2 of the script file, parses it into
whitespace-separated arguments, and prepends them to the
command-line argument list.
The
.B !#
line terminates the header block; everything after it is the
script body.
.PP
Backslash escape sequences are supported in meta-argument lines:
.B \\\\n
(newline),
.B \\\\t
(tab),
.B \\\\r
(return),
.B \\\\\\\\
(literal backslash),
.B \\\\\fInnn\fR
(octal character code).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HAFOD_LIB_DIRS
Additional library search directories, colon-separated.
These are prepended to the Chez Scheme library search path.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
If set,
.B hafod
loads its configuration file from
.IB $XDG_CONFIG_HOME /hafod/init.ss
instead of the default
.IR ~/.config/hafod/init.ss .
.SH EXAMPLES
Simple script with shebang:
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/usr/bin/env hafod
!#
(import (hafod))
(display (run/string (ls \-la)))
.RE
.fi
.PP
Using
.B \-e
entry point:
.PP
.nf
.RS
#!/path/to/hafod \\\\
-e main -s
!#
(define (main args)
  (for-each
    (lambda (f)
      (display (string-append "Processing: " f "\\n")))
    args))
.RE
.fi
.PP
Using
.B \-l
to preload definitions:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ cat prelude.ss
(define greeting "Hello")

$ cat script.ss
(display (string-append greeting " world\\n"))

$ hafod -l prelude.ss -s script.ss
Hello world
.RE
.fi
.PP
Pipeline with run/string in a one-liner:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ hafod -c '(display (run/string (pipe (ls) (grep "\\\\.ss$"))))'
.RE
.fi
.PP
Shell mode in the REPL:
.PP
.nf
.RS
$ hafod
> ls \-la
> cat README.md | grep hafod
> ls *.ss > scheme\-files.txt
> echo $HOME
> cd /tmp
.RE
.fi
.PP
Minimal config file
.RI ( ~/.config/hafod/init.ss ):
.PP
.nf
.RS
(set\-prompt! "hafod> ")
(bind\-key! "C\-x C\-e" cmd\-open\-below)
(enable\-paredit!)
.RE
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR scheme (1),
.BR scsh (1)
.SH AUTHORS
.B scsh
was written by Olin Shivers and Brian Carlstrom.
.PP
.B hafod
is a port to Chez Scheme by Dominic Pearson.
